# Energy loss tables

A detailed description of energy loss process, as implemented in PUMAS, can be
found in section 3.1 of the [reference
paper](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cpc.2018.04.001)
([arXiv:1705.05636](https://arxiv.org/abs/1705.05636)). For radiative processes
[alternative cross-sections](tutorials.md#tuning-the-physics) can be used as
well.
{: .justify}

## Energy loss tables in PUMAS

Energy loss tables are generated by PUMAS as an intermediary step when
tabulating the physical properties of materials, e.g. cross-section,
restricted energy loss, $\mu$ range, etc. The generated tables conform to the
[PDG](https://pdg.lbl.gov/2020/AtomicNuclearProperties/index.html) text format.
{: .justify}

!!! note
    By default [`pumas_context_create`][API_1] reuses already existing energy
    loss tables. This can be overwritten by providing a
    [`PUMAS_PHYSICS_SETTINGS`][PUMAS_PHYSICS_SETTINGS] argument with the
    *update* attribute set to *1*, forcing all energy loss tables to be
    generated again, i.e. updated.
    {: .justify}

A compilation of pre-computed material data is available online from the
[pumas-materials](https://github.com/niess/pumas-materials) project.  It also
possible to use the original PDG energy loss tables instead of PUMAS one by
substituting (overwriting) them. Note however that for $\mu$, PUMAS data tables
are more accurate than the PDG ones above 100 TeV energies due to improvements
on the photonuclear cross-section (see e.g.  [Sokalski _et
al._](https://arxiv.org/abs/hep-ph/0201122)).
{: .justify}


## Generating tables with PUMAS

The *dry* mode of operation of the [`pumas_context_create`][API_1] function is
meant specifically for generating energy loss tables (see
[`PUMAS_PHYSICS_SETTINGS`][PUMAS_PHYSICS_SETTINGS]). In this mode the physics
is only partially created resulting in lower CPU usage.
{: .justify}

[API_1]: api/index.html##HEAD/group/physics/pumas_physics_create
[PUMAS_PHYSICS_SETTINGS]: api/index.html##HEAD/type/pumas_physics_settings
